The Democratic Alliance (DA) condemns the South African Human Rights Commission’s (SAHRC) blatant attempt to further fan racial conflict related to Brackenfell High School. In an absurd statement released on Monday, the Commission said that it “is shocked to learn that in this day and age a racially segregated private event was held for matric learners from the school”. This statement by the Commission is a ridiculous attempt to fan the flames of racial divisions without any regard for facts. The Commission’s attempt to brand this private party as “a racially segregated”, “whites only” event is wrong and highly irresponsible. It is madness for a Chapter 9 institution to assert that private, social gatherings attended by persons of one particular racial group is “segregation”. Does the SAHRC now expect that all private, social gatherings across the country adhere to certain racial criteria? The learners, parents and teachers, who attended this private event in their personal capacities are now being attacked by the SAHRC in what can only be described as the most deplorable example of grandstanding. This is not the first time the SAHRC has sought to grandstand during this pandemic at the expense of learners. In June, the Commission sought to take the Western Cape Education Department (WCED) to court for opening schools as per the Government Gazette. A decision they later had to backtrack because the WCED had complied with the law. The facts are, following the Brackenfell High School cancelling its matric dance due to Covid-19 restrictions, a group of individuals organisied a matric party that had nothing to do with the school. Of the 254 Matrics at the school, 42 and their parents attended. These facts are, however, an inconvenience to the narrow, race baiting interests of the SAHRC and their fascist friends, the EFF. While the violent scenes outside the school should rightfully be condemned – the race baiting and misinformation should be rejected. Get to know newly elected DA leader, John Steenhuisen, and invest in the 2021 Local Government Election campaign. Click here.