Please scroll down for the Afrikaans statement / Sien asseblief die Afrikaanse verklaring hieronder. The DA is looking forward to the by-elections that will take place tomorrow across all of South Africa. After months of preparation and hard work, we are ready to participate in elections in wards across the country. Tomorrow, every single vote will count, and every voter who can vote, should vote in their ward. Voters who want to determine whether a by-election is taking place in their ward and whether they are registered to vote can visit the IEC’s website at https://www.elections.org.za/ieconline/. During the recent DA Federal Congress, the DA elected new leadership that brought stability and a clear focus to the DA. We are asking voters across the country to vote for us to elect Ward Councillors who can and will deliver a clear focus on you, the resident. Keep your ward blue, and turn your ward blue, but do not let your ward fall to the ANC and corruption. Our country is deeply wounded, especially as a result of the Covid pandemic, and now is the time to start recovering. The DA is the only party that is big enough, and has a proven track record in good and clean service delivery. Tomorrow is an opportunity for millions of South Africans to say no to poor governance and yes to good, clean, hard working Councillors. We ask you to please take part in this historic democratic moment in our country and go to your nearest ballot box and help us win wards across the country. Keep things moving forward by choosing a big party, with a track record. Only a party with a good track record can be trusted tomorrow. DA gereed vir tussenverkiesings more Die DA sien uit na die tussenverkiesings wat more landwyd plaasvind. Na maande van voorbereiding en harde werk is ons gereed om deel te neem in verkiesings in wyke oor die land heen. Die DA doen ‘n beroep op elke liewe kieser in elke wyk waar ‘n tussenverkiesing plaasvind om more hul stem uit te bring en die ANC en korrupsie uit te hou. Kiesers wat wil vasstel of ‘n tussenverkiesing in hul wyk plaasvind en of hulle geregsitreer is om te stem, kan die OVK se webblad besoek by https://www.elections.org.za/ieconline/. Die DA het tydens sy pas-afgelope nasionale kongres nuwe leierskap verkies wat stabiliteit en ‘n duidelike fokus na die DA gebring het. Ons vra kiesers oor die hele land om vir ons te stem om skoon en bekwame regerings tot stand te bring. Ons land is diep gewond, veral as gevolg van die Covid-pandemie, en dis nou tyd om te begin genees. Die DA is die enigste party wat ‘n bewese rekord in goeie en skoon regering het en wat groot en effektief genoeg is om die korrupsie waaronder ons almal gebuk gaan vir eens en vir altyd uit te roei. More is ‘n geleentheid vir miljoene Suid-Afrikaners om nee te sê vir swak regering en ja vir ‘n nuwe begin. Ons vra u om asseblief deel te neem aan hierdie historiese demokratiese oomblik in ons land en na u naaste stembus te gaan en ons te help om blou regerings oor die land te vestig. U stem vir die DA is die begin van Ware Hoop, Ware Verandering, NOU, in Suid Afrika. Get to know newly elected DA leader, John Steenhuisen, and invest in the 2021 Local Government Election campaign. Click here.