The Democratic Alliance (DA) is not satisfied with the incomplete report tabled before Parliament’s portfolio committee on home affairs on Tuesday into allegations against the acting CEO of Government Printing Works (GPW), Alinah Fosi. This report raises more questions than answers and several allegations remain to be investigated. While the Public Service Commission (PSC) report seemingly seeks to exonerate Ms Fosi, the DA is of the view that she is a long way from being cleared. The PSC investigated allegations that Ms Fosi bypassed procurement processes to force through the awarding of a ‘strategic workshop’ to a preferred supplier. The report’s terms of reference rested on two aspects related to the ‘strategic workshop’. Did Ms Fosi issue an unlawful instruction and did this lead to an irregular appointment? These allegations have not be adequately addressed, which is why the has DA insisted that the full report serves before the committee, along with additional documents mentioned by the Minister in relation to a Hawks investigation into further allegations against Ms Fosi, as well as for the PSC to answer the questions of concern around the investigation. This request was rejected by the committee chairperson with the support of ANC members. A recommendation by the Parliamentary Constitutional and Legal Services Office Memo that the committee refer the remainder of the allegations together with the supporting documentation against Ms Fosi to the PSC was also rejected. This wreaks of a cover up on the part of the ANC, and the DA will not leave this matter lying down. Especially in light of the allegations that certain members of the public and the private sector are campaigning for the favourable consideration of Ms Fosi’s application as permanent GPW CEO, and that this campaign is related to future strategic projects Government Printing Works must undertake in the next five years. Parliamentary portfolio committees’ oversight role requires of us to ensure that the terms of reference of any investigation cover all the allegations and to be able to adequately interrogate such reports and make recommendations. Click here to contribute to the DA’s legal action challenging irrational and dangerous elements of the hard lockdown in court