The Democratic Alliance (DA) calls on President Cyril Ramaphosa to immediately release the final investigations reports by the Special Investigations Unit (SIU) related to several land reform corruption cases. In a response to a DA parliamentary question, the Minister of Justice and Correctional Services Ronald Lamola said that “it is the President’s prerogative to release SIU’s final reports” of the 6 cases and more than 260 people it investigated since 2011. This morning reports emerged that a high-ranking ANC official in the Eastern Cape allegedly gave a wealthy businessman and friend a state farm as a ‘gift’ after the previous farmer was suddenly told he was occupying the land illegally. Vuyani Zigana lost the land near Kokstad where he had been farming since 2012. Due to this injustice he also had to sell most of his cattle to pay for the cost of the sheriff who held them for three months. And he has spent R80 000 pursuing the matter in court, only for officials from the Department of Agriculture, Land Reform and Rural Development (DALRRD) to not show up at the appointed court dates. This is another indication of how the ANC’s corruption and patronage is impeding land reform in South Africa. While the Minister of Agriculture, Land Reform and Rural Development, Thoko Didiza, have reportedly implemented an investigation, the DA questions whether those involved will ever be held to account. Currently, the DA knows of three other cases where severe misconduct, if not outright corruption, have hampered emerging farmers from owning the land they have successfully farmed for years: These cases show that the DALRRD is either incredibly mismanaged or incredibly corrupt. Minister Didiza needs to step in immediately. Instead of blindly adopting poor thought-out policies, the Department should endeavor to apply the policies currently in place to ensure that black farmers leasing Government land and making a success of it are supported, not undermined when cadres become envious of their success. A transparent database should be established where relevant information regarding the leasing of land should be easily accessible by members of the public. Successful farmers should be given title deeds and not be forced to reapply for a new lease every few years. They cannot be forced to continue with the threat of removal perpetually hanging over their heads. Come elections, Government will again make a lot of noise about expropriation without compensation and giving land to previously disenfranchised people. Those promises would be easier believed if they did not steal land from their own people to reward cadres and friends, and if the President published the SIU reports to see if justice has indeed been done. In the meantime, those promises means nothing to the farmers wondering when they will be forced to bid all their hard work good-bye.