The majority of South Africans would agree that the pursuit of economic transformation in South Africa has been an unambiguous failure. However, what we understand economic transformation to mean differs, and this is evident in how it is assessed. In order to measure progress of economic transformation, there is a self-defeating habit of looking at the demographic profile of the owners of JSE listed companies and those who occupy executive positions in companies and institutions broadly. The theory is that in an economically just society these outcomes would reflect the racial demographics of the population. This is of course not true. It is entirely possible, as will surely one day be the case, for there to be ‘black’ majority ownership of the JSE and for the majority of executives to be ‘black’ while economic injustice persists. In fact, we can go as far as saying that there can be 100% ‘black’ ownership of the economy and for the economy to still exclude the majority of South Africans, as it is possible for economic injustice to exist in racially homogenous societies. Indeed, many South Africans reject the idea that replacing a white economic elite with a black economic elite equates to economic justice. And yet, we obsess with indicators that can only inform us about the racial demography of the ‘1%’. We need to find a way of focusing the measurement of transformation away from elite gains towards measuring the ability of all in society to earn an income and build wealth. It is for this reason that the DA’s draft economic justice policy is a key discussion point for the upcoming policy conference. The stark realities we are confronted with now, require concessions from a wide variety of stakeholders: Critically, the official policy of trickle-down redress i.e. coopting the politically connected onto boards and ownership of companies, will not work as a plan to include the majority of South Africans into the economy. And thus, ultimately it will fail as a way to buy businesses the social license to operate which many seek. There will continue to be mass resentment from the majority excluded from the economy. However, how merit is assessed at various stages (e.g. extra-curricular activity, university attended, referees for job referrals) can be elitist. And we must be concerned about how we ensure that everyone has a reasonable opportunity to nurture innate talents and develop strengths. There also needs to be recognition that some may never possess or have not been able to develop, through no fault of their own, any monetizable ability. And thus, we need to provide a floor below which no human being, no matter how vulnerable their situation can fall beneath. Balancing the realities highlighted above, and no doubt numerous others, is the primary work of the DA policy conference to be held on the 5th and 6th of September 2020. The future of South Africa depends on successfully challenging the current hegemonic view of economic transformation. Absent any policy change, South Africa will continue to be characterized as an economy of outsiders and insiders.