The Democratic Alliance (DA) welcomes the statement by Western Cape Premier, Alan Winde on his Government’s resolution to allow for the sale of alcohol and the safe reopening of all businesses. This is because the Western Cape Government from the very onset of this pandemic immediately set to work in building healthcare capacity to ensure that they would meet the demands of people requiring medical intervention. The DA commends them on being able to do so with room to spare. Many lives have been saved due to the early and rapid response by the Western Cape Government. According to Premier Winde, data indicates that the Western Cape has passed its peak with hospital admissions falling. This is good news indeed and something we celebrate. It is very clear that we now to urgently turn out focus to the economic disaster that is playing itself out across the country. That is why it is critical that the alcohol ban is lifted which is having devastating effects on jobs and the economy in the Western Cape and across the country. Farmers, farm workers and retailers are suffering due to this illogical ban by the National Government. In fact, South African Medical Research Council President, Dr. Glenda Gray has already stated that there is sufficient hospital space to allow for the lifting of the alcohol ban which correlates Premier Winde’s data. The DA also supports the Western Cape Government’s view that if it is safe for businesses to open, then they should be allowed to do so. From restaurants being able to sell alcohol to tourism related sectors, we must give every business owner the fighting chance to stay open and protect the employment of their workers. As Premier Winde has outlined, tens of thousands of jobs have been lost and even more are under threat if immediate action is not taken to lift the alcohol ban and open up the economy. The Western Cape can do so in a safe and responsible way which allows people the opportunity to rebuild their lives after suffering incredible financial hardships due to the lockdown. This would also be consistent with the so-called “risk adjusted approach’” touted by President Ramaphosa which was supposed to allow districts and provinces to move down levels of the lockdown as the situation improved in those areas. The DA is fully behind Premier Winde and his Government’s efforts and we trust that the National Government will put politics aside and allow South Africans to get back to work urgently.