Please find attached an English and an Afrikaans soundbite by Dr Roy Jankielsohn MPL. It is clear that the Public Protector (PP), Busisiwe Mkhwebane, is blatantly attempting to delay holding senior politicians involved in the controversial Gupta-linked Vrede Dairy Project to account. Her application on 8 July 2020 to the Constitutional Court to overturn the Supreme Court of Appeal’s denial of her application to appeal the outcome of the High Court is outrageous. The following timeline indicates how the PP is abusing the courts to deny justice to the 80 impoverished beneficiaries of the Vrede Dairy Project, and delay accountability for the politicians who were involved in the channelling of money to the Gupta family who are central to allegations of state capture: The tactics of constant denials by the political architects of the Vrede Dairy Project are assisted by the PP’s tactics of legal delays. Meanwhile, the desperate and impoverished beneficiaries of this project have been side-lined for seven years without any justice. In her judgment, Judge Tolmay, citing a previous ruling of the court, indicated further that “The Public Protector must not only discover the truth but must also inspire confidence that the truth has been discovered”. The truth regarding the Vrede Dairy Project cannot ignore the crucial role of various senior politicians in the Free State province who for questionable reasons sacrificed the hopes and aspirations for a better life of 80 impoverished beneficiaries. The involvement of politicians that the PP is delaying adjudicating on is clear when the following are taken into account: During the review court case, the PP cited a lack of resources to carry out the necessary investigations as reasons why the initial investigation was not able to address all the issues. The PP appears to have plenty of time and resources to seek legal recourse that aims to justify why she should not adequately do her work, instead of using this time and resources to actually do her job. The DA will continue to take the necessary legal action to ensure that justice prevails regarding the Vrede Dairy Project, and oppose all legal attempts by the PP to prevent this from taking place.