The Democratic Alliance (DA) notes today’s press conference held
by Premier David Makhura. The ANC has taken illegal actions which will be
challenged. The simple truth is that
when the ANC fails to win an election, it resorts to undemocratic and
non-procedural means to get back power; what has happened in Tshwane
demonstrates this. There has been a decline
in ANC support over several elections and this trend has continued. Therefore, after the 2021
Local Government Elections, there will be scores of municipalities around the
country that will find themselves in a minority situation as has been the case
in Tshwane. We cannot allow the ANC to
use untruths, half-truths and outright subversion to undo democratic decisions.
Because if we fail now, the consequences for municipalities around the country
after the 2021 Local Government Elections will be dire. In his media conference
today, the Premier misled the public. We will hold a press
conference to unpack every untruth and half-truth. MEC Maile has ignored the
reply by Council to his letter in terms of Section 139 of the Constitution;
here are four short examples: – Water in regions 5 and 7
was capped by Rand Water because the Vaal Dam was running blow acceptable
capacity levels; – A contract has been
signed with ERWAT to address the water issues in Hammanskraal; – The water treatment plan
in Region 7 is back to its normal operations since Saturday, 14th December
2019; – The letter further
indicated that Senior Managers in the Service Delivery Cluster for both Roads
and Transport and Human Settlements were suspended and this had an impact on
service delivery. The truth is that these managers have been reinstated and are
back at work; and – The deterioration of the
Wonderboom airport has been resolved. It is clear that the City
of Tshwane had the full intention to work with the Provincial Government but
was declined the opportunity for political gain. We will continue to
air these truths as we get legal advice on our course of action.