The Democratic Alliance (DA) has learnt that Minister of Human Settlements, Water and Sanitation, Lindiwe Sisulu, has hired ex-Rural Development and Land Reform Minister Gugile Nkwinti as Chairperson of a newly established Ministerial Advisory Committee on Water Services. By invoking S76(1) of the Water Service Act, Sisulu is able to bypass Ministerial Handbook staff limits and continue to stack her political deck by establishing committees over which she has sole discretion on appointments and remuneration. This new committee is additional to the Advisory Committee on Water Services that already exists within the Department on which Mo Shaik now sits. Ex-minister Nkwinti has been appointed on a long-term basis as Chairperson, linked to the term of the Minister, and will earn R2.4 million per annum for working for a maximum of 15 days per month (part-time). This is a travesty. Last year, the Office of the Public Protector found that Nkwinti had violated both the Executive Ethics Code and the Constitution.  This after the DA lodged a complaint alleging that Nkwinti had influenced his department to buy Bekendvlei Farm in 2011 for R97 million and subsequently allocate it to his friend and colleague, Errol Velile Present. Present, an ANC staffer was subsequently fired after he was arrested for alleged involvement in cash-in-transit heists. Nkwinti was further embroiled in a number of questionable and potentially irregular transactions undertaken by the Department during his tenure, including the purchase of Fish River Resort in 2017 despite warnings by experts that this land parcel would cost the Department R33.9 million annually in operating losses. The four members of the Water Advisory Committee that will serve under Nkwinti are as follows: These five appointees will be responsible for the following: Unsatisfied with the existing litany of incompetent and unqualified cadres already recruited – including failed ex-minister Bathabile Dlamini and failed ex-NDPP Menzi Simelane – both of whom were subject to scathing findings by the Constitutional Court, names such as UCT Fees Must Fall Leader Chumani Maxwele; former COPE regional leader Mbulelo Ncedana; and former PAC leader Thami ka Plaatjie, also form part of the NRRTT which cost the taxpayer over R13.9 million per year. These latest appointments take the South African people for fools and spits in the face of all honest and hardworking citizens struggling to make ends meet in the face of our crumbling economy. The DA will once again write to the Public Service Commission imploring them to investigate and we will proceed to mobilise South Africans to publicly oppose these appointments.