Co-sign DA Leader, John Steenhuisen’s, letter calling for freedom from Eskom: www.powertothepeople.org.za The following comments were delivered today at a press conference at Parliament. The DA Shadow Minister of Mineral Resources and Energy, Kevin Mileham MP, spoke on the energy sector and IPPs. The DA Shadow Minister of Public Enterprises, Ghaleb Cachalia MP, spoke on Eskom and the DA’s demands. Introduction It has been nearly a month since President Cyril Ramaphosa made a host of promises in his SONA speech to ensure energy security for South Africans. Yet nothing has changed. In fact, things have only gotten progressively worse. Within the space of just 48 hours – the country has gone from no loadshedding to Stage 1 and 2, and today we have leapt to stage 4 rolling blackouts. The President is at the precipice, and he has two choices – either he continues to drag the nation down with Eskom, or he takes the bold action, stands up to the unions and internal ANC factions, and do the right thing to break Eskom’s monopoly. The impact of Eskom’s rolling blackouts has had detrimental consequences on our economy. Small businesses are closing their doors and jobs are being shed. We need change, and we need it now. Eskom is dead Eskom is dead. It is time that the ANC government accepts the fact that no amount of bailouts and turnaround strategies will save the power utility. We can no longer waste public money on pointless attempts to save a lost cause. Eskom has R450 billion in debt and poses the single biggest risk to our economy. The entity is in its death spiral, and South Africa needs to look at a future beyond Eskom towards an electricity future that focuses on achieving energy security through alternative sources. How did we get here? It is no secret that South Africa’s electricity crisis has largely been compounded by the fact that Eskom has a monopolistic grip over the energy sector. The energy crises, has, however, also been further compounded by four issues: corruption, dithering, ANC ideology, and unions. In reality, energy experts agree that any new generation capacity must (at least in the short to medium term) come from the private sector. The DA has proposed the Independent Electricity Management Operator Bill. This Bill is currently before the Portfolio Committee on Mineral Resources and Energy and would open up South Africa’s electricity supply sector and make it more competitive. It would allow IPPs to compete on an equal footing with Eskom. When the DA says we should put politics aside, we mean it and we are willing to reach across the political divide and work with other parties to ensure that this Bill gets passed. DA demands Energy security in South Africa is possible without having to rely on Eskom. Eskom is dead, and South Africa needs to move forward, the DA, therefore, puts forward the following proposals: DA Campaign South Africa’s future hangs in the balance, and one way to stop our decline is to cut Eskom loose. It is for this reason that the DA this week began a nationwide effort to free South Africans from Eskom. This is a broad and intensive program of resident and citizen engagement – both about the daily struggles that electricity shortages are causing and to dissect our plan to free South Africans from Eskom. DA councillors and members of provincial legislatures and Parliament will lead intensive engagement efforts in every community around South Africa. They will visit every corner of South Africa to rally support for our demands and our plan to give power to the people. Once we have the full support of all South Africans for our plan and demands, we will take our fight to the President. We call on all South Africans to join our campaign to fight for energy security and to free our nation from Eskom’s grip.