Please find attached a soundbite from John Steenhuisen MP following the launch of the party’s dedicated Covid-19 information channel. Please also find attached pictures here, here and here. Today the Democratic Alliance (DA) Leader, John Steenhuisen MP successfully launched “Corona Cast”, the DA’s dedicated Coronavirus information channel. We will be broadcasting live every Tuesday and Friday at 14:00 on our social media pages to keep citizens informed during the 21-day lockdown period. The broadcast affords a unique opportunity to citizens to ask questions live and receive answers instantly on issues related to the Coronavirus. The party will be collaborating with and hosting industry experts, its Shadow Cabinet, and public health professionals on the channel to provide up-to-date information on the state of the Coronavirus outbreak in South Africa. South Africans can make use of the following addresses and platforms to submit queries, raise concerns, and make suggestions: Email: coronavirus@da.org.za Webpage: www.da.org.za/defeatingcoronavirus Those who have missed todays broadcast can still watch it using the following links: Facebook: https://bit.ly/2WM8W0O Twitter: https://bit.ly/3dwpEaP YouTube: https://bit.ly/33In90h “Now is the time for us to band together as South Africans, put our country first, and defeat the Covid-19 virus. The next three weeks of lockdown, and the months that follow this period, will be our greatest test as a nation. We can get through this if we stand united against our common enemy. I ask that all South Africans focus on what needs to be done and comply with everything that is required of them. Our efforts to beat this virus are only as strong as the weakest link in the chain. Everyone has to be 100% on board and committed. Every measure is essential. Stay at home, avoid gatherings, maintain your hygiene, and cooperate with law enforcement and the SANDF. These will be trying times, but we must show restraint and peaceful cooperation in everything we do. That is the only way we will win.” – John Steenhuisen MP, Leader of the DA