Please find attached an English by Angel Khanyile, DA Minister of Home Affairs and  an Afrikaans soundbite by Adrian Roos MP, DA Shadow Deputy Minister of Home Affairs. Today, the Democratic Alliance (DA) laid charges of corruption, bribery, aiding and abetting fraud at the Pretoria Central Police Station against the Acting CEO of the Government Printing Works, Ms Alinah Fosi. The charges relate to allegations of corruption, mismanagement, victimisation of staff, soliciting bribes, interference in supply chain processes, nepotism and abuse of international travel submitted by a whistle-blower to Parliament. This action was taken after various attempts by the DA to have all the allegations investigated were thwarted by ANC members in Parliament’s Portfolio Committee of Home Affairs. One allegation of supply chain irregularity was investigated by the Public Service Commission (PSC) and the claim that this investigation cleared Ms Fosi of corruption is misleading. Ms Fosi was found guilty of supply chain irregularity but cleared of giving an unlawful instruction. However, evidence of such unlawful instruction was provided to the lead PSC investigator, a former colleague of Ms Fosi. The Minister of Home Affairs, Aaron Motsoaledi, has referred allegations of improper influence in the appointment of Ms Fosi as permanent CEO of GPW to the Hawks. However other allegations remain un-investigated despite a recommendation of the Parliamentary Legal Advisors to the Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs to have all allegations referred to the PSC for investigation. These include running a catering business not declared to the DPSA, supply chain irregularities on a cleaning contract and misleading the Minister of Home Affairs in order to take an HR manager on a business class trip to France in return for covering up a complaint of assault on a junior employee. Further accusations which emerged after these allegations were considered by the Committee include that Z579 security paper, which can only be procured by GPW, is being provided to a third party non-security printer with the knowledge of Ms Fosi and with insufficient accounting methods in place. Z579 security paper is used to print visa labels, passport pages and vehicle licenses. There is no vendetta against Ms Fosi. Members of Parliament have a legal statutory duty in terms of the Prevention and Combating of Corrupt Activities Act to report allegations of corruption that are brought to their attention. The DA will ensure that no allegations are allowed to be swept under the carpet and that justice takes its course. Click here to contribute to the DA’s legal action challenging irrational and dangerous elements of the hard lockdown in court