Please find attached a soundbite by DA Shadow Minister of Communications and Digital Technologies, Phumzile Van Damme MP. The statement by President Cyril Ramaphosa this afternoon indicating that he has summoned Communications and Digital Technologies Minister, Stella Nbabeni-Abrahams is simply not good enough. He must set an example as the President of South Africa that lawlessness while our country deals with a global pandemic will not be tolerated, regardless of from whom it comes. He therefore ought to lay a criminal complaint against Ndabeni-Abrahams, a person who he appointed as a Minister and member of his Cabinet. And he must go a further step by removing her from his Cabinet. President Ramaphosa addressed the nation twice asking South Africans to obey the law while containment strategies for Covid-19 were being implemented. The majority of the people of our country have done so with diligence. Many have lost jobs and incomes while staying at home as he requested. Some have been brutalized by security forces for not obeying the law. He cannot expect that in these circumstances a mere slap on the wrist will suffice. Ndabeni-Abrahams must go! A screenshot of an Instagram post by former MP Mduduzi Manana dates 5 April 2020 shows Ndabeni-Abrahams seated a table dinner table with Manana, food in front of her, smiling for the camera. The post was captioned: “It was a great to host a former colleague and dear sister Cde Stella Ndabeni-Abrahams (Minister of Communications and Digital Technologies) on her way back from executing critical and essential services required for the effective functioning of our country during the nationwide lockdown”. While in terms of the Disaster Management Regulations, Members of the Executive fall “under Essential Services,” the regulations are very clear that restrictions of movement only apply when it is related to work. A visit to a friend for dinner does not qualify as such. Morever, Manana makes it clear in his post that Ndabeni-Abrahams had finished her duties for the day. Annexure B 11(a) of the regulations clearly states: 26. Services rendered by the Executive, members of Parliament, Members of the Provincial Legislature, Members of Local Councils, the Judiciary, traditional leaders, and National Office Bearers of Political Parties represented in Parliament. The ball is in your court Mr President. We trust you will lead. And leadership requires one to make decisions not only when it is convenient. 