Today the Parliamentary Portfolio Committee on Higher Education, Science and Technology will receive a briefing from the Minister of Higher Education, Blade Nzimande, on his Department’s Save the Academic Year plan in light of the Covid-19 lockdown. The Democratic Alliance (DA) will use this opportunity to present the Minister with our proposals for all students to have access to resources for e-learning during the lockdown as well as our proposals to ensure a smooth continuation of the academic year post lockdown. Institutions of higher education commenced with their various e-learning programmes this week. While the DA welcomes the Department of Higher Education, Science and Innovation’s decision to take tertiary education online to mitigate the effects of the pandemic on the academic year, we are concerned that there has been a lack of proper planning and preparation which will delay the academic programme. We don’t want any student to be left behind and remain concerned that some students may not have the necessary resources for online learning. In the long-term, mobile phones are not adequate devices for studying, or to submit projects. Some students are living in areas with poor connectivity and may not be able to access their learning material, while others don’t have optimal learning environments at home. And some students simply do not have adequate spaces within their homes where they can concentrate or study. The DA will the committee briefing as an opportunity to present its Blue Book recommendations that government can implement in order to address the challenges in higher education brought about by the lockdown. Some of our recommendations on e-learning include: A further concern is how the academic programme will proceed once the lockdown is eased. The DA will therefore also recommend the following proposals to Minister Nzimande that the Department should consider post-lockdown: For many students, this period of uncertainty has derailed their future plans and have placed additional pressures on them. The DA, therefore, calls on the Department to ensure that every student, especially those in poorer communities and remote areas, have access to the necessary resources to make a success of their academic year. It is critical that Minister Nzimande takes proactive steps that no student, no matter their socio-economic circumstances, gets left behind in the bid for virtual tertiary education during the Covid-19 pandemic.