In a reply to a Democratic Alliance (DA) parliamentary question, the Minister of Police, Bheki Cele, revealed that of the 112 police stations submitted to Health and Safety inspections in the 2019/2020 financial year, only 5 (4.5%) police stations were compliant. In order to do their jobs to the best of their ability it is reasonable to expect that the environment that police officers are expected to do their duties in, contributes to their health and well-being. Like all other civil servants, they also have the right to work in a safe and secure environment. The health and safety inspections revealed the following: This is a gross violation of the South African Police Service’s (SAPS) duty to provide a working environment that is safe and without risk to the health of SAPS employees. Furthermore, it is the duty of the Department of Public Service and Administration’s (DPSA) to ensure that government departments enforce health and safety standards. The DPSA has a responsibility to concern itself with the health and safety of all civil servants, including our men and women in blue. As such, the DA will write to Minister Cele as well as the Minister of Public Service and Administration, Senzo Mchunu, to request that: Chapter 11 of the Constitution states that the objects of the South African Police Service (SAPS) are to prevent, combat and investigate crime; to maintain public order; to protect and secure the inhabitants of South Africa and their property; and to uphold and enforce the law. Police officers put their lives on the line every day to ensure the safety of their communities. It should not be too much to ask that their places of work are safe havens for them, and the community they serve. It is the duty of the Ministers of Cele and Mchunu to ensure that SAPS officers are able to fulfill their obligations safely and securely. The DA will continue to put pressure on these ministers until each and every police station and office complies with health and safety standards.