South African tax payers have forked out a whopping R37 million for what is effectively a “washing line” to keep Covid-19 from reaching South Africa from Zimbabwe. Almost R1 million per kilometre was spent on a 1.8 metre-high wire fence meant to halt illegal border crossings into South Africa along the Beitbridge Border Post. Once referred to as the “Snake of Fire” because of the 2 800 volts that coursed through those unfortunate enough to come into contact with it, the original border fence was substantial, solid and close to impenetrable. But due to a lack of maintenance and the lackluster monitoring of the border by the SANDF over the years, it had become as porous as a sieve. This has occurred, despite there being a 3 metre high double fence on either side of the electric fence that marked the border between the two countries. The advent of Covid-19 was supposed to address and change all that. The announcement by the Department of Public Works (DPWI) and Infrastructure Minister, Patricia de Lille, that repairs totaling R37 million would be effected to 40 kilometres of the border fence, should have signaled a new era in tackling our almost non-existent border. It would have ensured that kilometres of fencing stolen for animal kraals around the Beitbridge border area would have been replaced and restored. According to the Minister, all emergency procurement protocols had been adhered to. A contractor had been duly appointed to do a fast-track job to secure our country against the movement of undocumented illegals with the potential to infect South Africans. Regrettably, within days, pictures emerged of gaping holes in the new fence. Reports of stolen fence posts followed. The Minister responded that there would be increased security around the fence to ensure that there were no more breaches. What sort of border fence did we procure that required its own security? What quality of material was used that it can barely withstand a wire cutter, and who drafted the specifications for this fence? A game fence on an ordinary game farm stands between 1.8 metres and 2.4 metres high. A border fence, such as the one erected on the Morocco-Spain border, is 6 metres high. This border fence, costing R37 million, should be impenetrable – and built to last. It clearly is not. The Minister has subsequently backtracked on her earlier assertions that the appointment of Caledon River Properties trading as Magwa Construction was within the procurement guidelines of the declared National State of Disaster. In addition, the Department has admitted to having deviated from procurement processes by appointing Magwa Construction through a nomination process. After stoically defending the appointment, the Minister has now requested an audit into the entire project by the Attorney-General. We can only hope that their audit will also reveal the basis on which Magwa Construction was selected above other more well-known companies. Today, I submitted questions to Minister De Lille around the appointment of the contractor, as well as around the specifications of the fence and the value for money that our tax payers have received. If the purpose of the fence was merely a temporary cessation of the influx of illegal immigrants to protect our populace against Covid-19, then perhaps the fence built would have been sufficient. But it was not. It has been hailed as the new border fence between South Africa and Zimbabwe. Sadly, Minister De Lille’s fence is a R37 million band-aid on a bullet wound. If we are going to protect our borders, we need a “Snake of Fire”, not a washing line costing almost R1 million per kilometre.