On behalf of the Democratic Alliance I would like to wish all South Africans who observe the Christian faith a blessed and safe Easter. These are uncertain times for our country – and indeed the world – and I hope that you might find comfort and strength in your faith, and in the message of love and sacrifice that accompanies this celebration. Under normal circumstances, many of you would have spent Easter with your extended family or friends. This is a time when many South Africans would traditionally travel home for the long weekend, or attend religious gatherings. But we are in uncharted territory right now, and we are fast learning new ways of getting through our daily lives. I urge you to please remain committed to the measures put in place to keep us safe. Stay at home, practise good hand hygiene and always maintain sufficient physical distance from others. In the coming weeks and months, we will be tested in ways we could not have imagined a short while ago. As a nation, and as individuals, we will be stretched to new limits. We will have to deal with stress, anxiety and fear. Many of us could come face to face with the coronavirus, and some of us will experience loss. To get through this, it is important to remember that we are not alone. We must take strength and inspiration from others. Today, on my Coronacast video, I spoke to a woman from Cape Town called Megan who is one of South Africa’s first Covid-19 survivors. She was one of the first 50 people in the country to be diagnosed with the infection, and she is also one of the first to have been given the all-clear. She shared with me her experience of being sick, as well as her thoughts on how to beat it. I encourage you to read what she has written on her blog about contracting, living with and recovering from Covid-19. I know that we will cope, as a nation, with these fast-changing circumstances we find ourselves in because we are a resilient people. We have overcome enormous obstacles in our past, and we have emerged stronger and more united. This is no different. We will overcome this challenge, in true South African spirit, and we will rebuild our economy and society with the grit and determination that we are known for. Stay committed to the fight, stay safe and have a blessed Easter.