The Democratic Alliance (DA) will write to the Mayor of Musina Municipality, Mihloti Muhlophe, to suspend the Speaker, Gilbert Netshisaulu, after he inharmoniously deferred two crucial reports which were suppose to have been debated and adopted by Council during an ordinary Council meeting that was held last week. The Speaker has, for the second time since the end of last year, vehemently refused to include important reports on the agenda and deferred them to the next Council meeting claiming that the report being previously “deferred” does not mean that these reports should be included in the agenda. It is clear that the Speaker is failing dismally to execute his duties in Council by not allowing Council to debate these reports which affect the lives of residents. The first report that he did not want to add to the agenda relates to the impounding of animals that roam busy roads without any supervision. The DA considers this to be an urgent matter considering the danger being posed by stray animals on our roads. Recently, there has been an increase in stray animals roaming freely around N1 road heading towards Beitbridge Boarder and Musina villages and especially at night. This poses a massive danger to all the motorists and road users.  The second report relates to the priority housing development areas. The DA feels that this report should also be given urgent attention considering that many community members are forced to stay in unsafe structures and backrooms due to the municipality’s failure to provide proper housing. To compound the matter, there has been unlawful invasion of land by disgruntled community members. Still the Speaker does not see these matters as anything that warrants urgent attention. It is clear that the Speaker is not capable to lead in this capacity and this will cause an unnecessary service delivery delays whilst increasing the current service delivery backlog in the municipality. The DA urges the Mayor to take action against this inept Speaker and further requests that the Mayor ensures these reports are brought to Council in the next setting so they can be debated without any further delay.