Please find attached the DPSA salary scales for 2019 here. The Democratic Alliance (DA) can reveal that Menzi Simelane and Mo Shaik are currently earning an estimated R1 978 533 per annum as “Special Advisors” to the Minister of Human Settlements, Water and Sanitation, Lindiwe Sisulu. This amount is at Notch A of a Level 16 DPSA Grading – the Grading given only to Director Generals of National Government Departments. If, however, Shaik and Simelane’s positions have been benchmarked at a higher notch on the same scale, they could be earning in excess of R2.2 million per annum – which is double the remuneration received by Members of Parliament. The DA can also reveal that Minister Sisulu’s “Special Advisors”, are – according to the Grading’s leaked – earning roughly R700 000 more than the Ministry’s Chief Director, who holds both an Honours Degree in Public Administration and a Masters Degree in Economic Policy. The total annual cost of Sisulu’s Ministerial Office staff remuneration stands in excess of R13.9 million per year. This is excluding the costs of the additional 19 employees recently staffing her “National Rapid Response Task Team”. By having yesterday attempted to re-issue her Office’s response to a Parliamentary Question originally replied to with full staff details on Friday, the Minister has done an excellent job revealing the cracks in her office, as well as the fact that she does not want taxpayers to know who she spends their money on – and just how much she is spending. The DA is yet to understand how an optometrist and an ex-prosecutor are qualified to provide advice to a department whose focus is on water, sanitation and housing delivery. There is no doubt that gross mis-hiring has taken place – and the deck has been stacked with well-paid political cadres. Sisulu’s staffing of a political war room in lieu of a capably staffed Ministry will not be allowed to continue unabated, while taps are running dry across our nation. The DA will, in the coming days, reveal further information and action taken in regards to the Minister’s Office, and her National Rapid Response Task Team.