The Democratic Alliance (DA) calls on the Department of Environment, Forestries and Fisheries (DEFF) and the Department of Human Settlements, Water and Sanitation (DHSW&S) to urgently implement the promised actions to restore the livelihoods of stakeholders around the Roodeplaat Dam. Last week DA Taemane Constituency Leader Adrian Roos was joined by DA Member of the DEFF Portfolio Committee Annerie Weber MP on an oversight inspection and meetings with affected stakeholders around the dam. The dam is almost completely covered with Water Hyacinth and this is having a devastating effect on businesses and tourism in an area that has already been hit hard by lockdown. There is a serious environmental impact as well as a knock-on effect to residents who benefit from work created by tourism and EPWP jobs created by implementing aquatic weed control activities on the dam. The effect on the blockage of the rowing course places the World Rowing Masters regatta at risk. Over 3000 athletes from around the world are expected to travel to South Africa for the event. The control of Roodeplaat dam is covered under a memorandum of understanding between the DEFF and DHSW&S with DEFF as the implementing agent to control all invasive alien species including water hyacinth, the major aquatic weed present at Roodeplaat dam. Residents have been directed on 7 February 2020 by DHSW&S to stop spraying activities and the intervention of DEFF through a contractor in March 2020 saved the South Africa Schools Rowing Championships. However, the combined efforts of this intervention and years of aquatic weed control by local stakeholders has been wiped out over the lockdown period during which the hyacinth was allowed to grow back to the extent that it almost completely covers the Dam. As Hyacinth doubles every 10 days time is running out. The DEFF indicated in June 2020 that a process was underway to appoint a contractor to manually remove the hyacinth and recently DHSW&S spokesperson Sputnik Ratau has indicated that a non-lethal spray operation is imminent. A combination of this and manual removal will create jobs for local workers in the area but also allow residents and business owners in the area to begin to piece together their livelihoods again. This action is allegedly being delayed by DHSW&S failing to give the go ahead on the spray. The DA will not rest until this matter has been resolved. Get to know newly elected DA leader, John Steenhuisen, and invest in the 2021 Local Government Election campaign. Click here.