Click here to find out what has the DA done in Parliament this year? Please find the DA Parliamentary Review Document here. For many South Africans, 2020 upended their lives in terrible ways. Many lost their lives and livelihoods, and everyone has had to adjust to a new normal that included finding innovative ways to work from home, wearing masks when out in the world, and social distancing from friends and family. For the Democratic Alliance (DA), 2020 has been a year of innovation and progress. This year we held the largest ever virtual Elective Federal Congress of any political party in South Africa with great success. While the DA made great strides in showing progress and adaptability, the government showed concerning signs of centralization via the illogical regulations of the National Command Council which instituted rules ranging from the laughable to the downright dangerous. Despite the many challenges the perpetual State of Disaster has brought, and the efforts of government to seemingly circumvent the oversight role that Parliament plays, the DA has continued with every effort to hold government to account. Outperforming all other opposition parties, the DA asked 66 % of all parliamentary questions (PQs) in the National Assembly (NA) this year. We submitted 1 893 written questions that matter to our constituencies and South Africans and 423 (49%) through the National Council of Provinces (NCOP). These questions play a vital role in holding the Executive to account and despite some Ministers doing their best to simply ignore the workings of Parliament, the DA’s questions revealed instances of either misconduct, maladministration or incompetence that would have simply been swept under the rug otherwise. Without the DA’s scrutiny, South Africans might never have known: The DA also set the tone in Parliament in focusing the institution’s attention on some of the burning issues facing our fellow citizens and our institutions: Not only did we work in Parliament to expose the rot and hold the Executive and public office bearers to account, but we also forced Parliament to look internally to hold Members of Parliament to account. In the face of the EFF’s rising populism, fascism and destabilization tactics, the DA laid a host of charges against the party’s leadership, not only with South African Human Rights Commission (SAHRC) and South African Police Service (SAPS), but also with Parliament’s Ethics Committee. We believe that Parliament has a responsibility to act as a bastion against utterances and behaviour that are at odds with our Constitutional democracy. While the EFF has chosen the route of violence and incitement in an effort to stay relevant, the DA has used this year as an opportunity to address the worries of a wide range of constituencies across the country. Despite the Covid-19 pandemic laying the ANC and other political parties lame, the DA has actively proved we do not just do better where we govern in the Western Cape, but we have done better nationally for all South Africans through Parliament. The year 2020 once again highlighted the important role Parliament can play in performing proper oversight. And while Parliament dropped the ball on a number of occasions, such as refusing the DA’s request for a Covid accountability committee and its slow start to get committees to work during the initial lockdown, the institution eventually come to the party by embracing technology. The DA will certainly push for Parliament to build on some of its achievements this year in becoming an institution with bite and making it more accessible to the public. Finally, the DA would like to recognize the work and contributions made by our late colleagues, Belinda Bozzoli and Thandi Mpambo-Sibhukwana. Throughout this pandemic, Belinda fought passionately in the interests of learners and students across the country, while Thandi fought tirelessly to alleviate poverty and unemployment before sadly passing away in June. We send strength and condolences to Belinda and Thandi’s family and friends and to all those who have lost loved ones during this time. Get to know newly elected DA leader, John Steenhuisen, and invest in the 2021 Local Government Election campaign. Click here.