The Democratic Alliance (DA) has today submitted to the Speaker of the National Assembly, Thandi Modise, the names of our nominees to serve on the independent panel which will determine whether there is a prima facie case for Parliament to continue with its removal process against the Public Protector, Adv Busisiwe Mkhwebane. If the panel is satisfied that there is indeed prima facie evidence to support such a process, Parliament will proceed to establish an Ad Hoc Committee for Mkhwebane’s removal proceedings. The DA is pleased to announce that we have put forward the names of some of the brightest legal minds in South Africa. They include Judge Robert Nugent and Judge Jeanette Traverso. We are confident that these individuals are fit and proper to independently assess the merits of the DA’s motion against the incumbent Public Protector. Furthermore, the DA has taken note of the fact that Mkhwebane filed an application with the Western Cape High Court to interdict Parliament’s removal proceedings against her on the basis that the newly adopted rules which will govern the process were unlawful and unconstitutional. While Mkhwebane has every right to explore the legal options at her disposal, the DA is confident that the rules which have been adopted by Parliament for the removal of Heads of Chapter 9 institutions, are not only lawful but also in line with the Constitution. Mkwebane’s assertion that the DA has not been objective on her performance is untrue. Our assessment of her performance has been based entirely on her work and conduct throughout her tenure as Public Protector. Mkhwebane has staggered from blunder to blunder and has continuously demonstrated that she is neither fit nor proper to occupy the office of Public Protector. If Mkhwebane spent as much energy on conducting her work independently and practicing the law, as she does evading accountability, then she wouldn’t have been in this position. The DA will not back down from this motion against Mkhwebane and is of the belief that she case to answer for.