The Democratic Alliance (DA) calls on Basic Education Minister, Angie Motshekga, and her department to show decisive leadership on the phased reopening of schools and the phasing in of additional grades. On 2 July 2020, the Minister announced changes to the phased reopening of schools. Due to the spike in Covid-19 infections across communities, it was decided to allow fewer grades back to school. This meant only Grade 6, Grade 11 and Grade R returned to school on 6 July. The Minister then mentioned that the remaining grades that were meant to return will be phased-in in July. No specific directions have been gazetted to this effect because the regulations did not specify when in July, the next official phasing in is expected to be on 3 August 2020. The public needs urgent answers from the Minister on when additional grades will return. With the growing calls from teachers’ unions for all schools to close, the Minister’s silence is only causing further panic, anxiety and confusion. With no teaching and learning taking place for the learners that have been not been phased in, the question then becomes, what plans do  unions and all those who are calling for closure of schools have to ensure that learners are indeed learning while they are at home? We have already heard reports of some provinces that have now taken it upon themselves and decided not to continue with the phasing in of the other grades. Recent reports indicate that KwaZulu-Natal and Limpopo have decided to suspend the return of other grades to schools. It remains to be seen whether more provincial education departments will cave into the pressure of trade unions who seemingly do not want to see learners complete their academic year. We call on Minister Motshekga to show decisive leadership during this time before thousands of learners are prevented from accessing their education. The DA reiterates its position that all learners need to return to school and where there is no adequate provision of keeping learners safe then this may be delayed. The Minister needs to provide leadership soon and give clear directions on what the next step is for schools to phase in the remaining grades that should have been phased in this month. Click here to contribute to the DA’s legal action challenging irrational and dangerous elements of the hard lockdown in court