During a meeting of Parliament’s portfolio committee on tourism this week, when asked by the Democratic Alliance (DA) questions about the research, empirical evidence and data that was used to ascertain the timeline for the reopening of the tourism sector – officials admitted that this was not based on data and even confirmed that they did “not know how much longer” the tourism sector would remain closed. The Tourism Minister, Mmamoloko Kubayi-Ngubane, and her delegation presented the revised budget of her department. The presentation essentially indicated that the sector would open up any time between 12 to 24 months’ time. To make matters worse, it appears as if the Department of Tourism has now seemingly resorted to making up facts in response to DA questions on the reopening of the tourism. In her response, the Minister referred to Switzerland that had to go back to lockdown after initially lifting their lockdown.  Research by the DA confirms that this is not the case.  Switzerland has in fact completely lifted their lockdown in June, and opened up their schools and restaurants in May.  Switzerland has been one of the world’s success stories when saving lives and livelihoods. Officials at the meeting also referenced statements made by the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) made about lockdowns.  Our research shows only the fact that the NYSE had themselves closed operations but have not pronounced on any lockdown itself. Although the Minister indicated that she was aware of the job losses en masse within the sector, her mind-boggling reply to another DA question was that employees, upon becoming employed, must enquire from their employees “if the employer is sustainable.” Again, the Minister demonstrates that she is herself a tourist of her portfolio. She simply does not understand the sector or even business in general and is now resorting to making up “facts” to justify her incompetence as hundreds of thousands of South Africans continue to lose their jobs. Click here to contribute to the DA’s legal action challenging irrational and dangerous elements of the hard lockdown in court