The Democratic Alliance (DA) will request that the Portfolio Committee on Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs ensure the Minister of Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs (CoGTA), Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma, gives account on how the R20 billion Covid-19 relief funding has been administered and spent by municipalities. Since the start of the Covid-19 lockdown and the announcement of the Covid-19 relief stimulus to help municipalities weather the storm, there has been concerns that the money would not reach the intended targets and be used to line the pockets of corrupt politicians. These fears are increasingly becoming a reality. Last week a report by the Auditor-General of South Africa (AG), Kimi Makwetu, revealed that only 8% of municipalities received a clean audit. In most of the municipalities that did not receive a clean audit, there were gross mismanagement of funds and indications of looting and corruption. It does not take much of an imagination to see the R2 billion in relief funding for municipalities disappearing down the same drain. In just the past few weeks the following allegations of gross and brazen financial mismanagement have come to light: On 23 March President Cyril Ramaphosa announced that the National Prosecuting Authority’s (NPA) would establish special Covid-19 anti-corruption units to expedite the prosecution and sentencing of those who are involved in corrupt activities related to the Covid-19 crisis. To date not another word has been said about these units. It is becoming more and more evident that these units are desperately needed if any of the Covid-19 relief measures are to make a dent in the crisis we are facing. It is time that the National Director of Public Prosecutions (NDPP), Shamila Batohi, gives clarity on whether these units have indeed been established and are actively investigating the escalating looting of Covid-19 funds. The DA has previously called on Finance Minister, Tito Mboweni, to create a Special Inspector-General in the National Treasury to prevent and investigate corruption related to Covid-19 funding. Our very reasonable suggestion seems to have fallen on deaf ears. There seems to be little appetite on the part of government to address the unabated Covid-19 looting spree currently taking place at municipalities across the country. It is for this reason that the DA believes that Minister Dlmini-Zuma must account to Parliament. If the Executive is reluctant to address the looting, the Parliament will force them to take action. Unless Government urgently creates a stopgap, the Covid-19 stimulus package meant to save lives and livelihoods will be nothing but a free-for-all buffet where stomach politics will reign supreme once again, and vulnerable and desperate citizens will be left out in the cold. Click here to contribute to the DA’s legal action challenging irrational and dangerous elements of the hard lockdown in court