The Democratic Alliance (DA) calls on National Treasury to urgently implement additional measures to stem the tide of corruption that followed the emergency procurement exemption for municipalities and government departments. While there is no doubt that it had good intentions with the issued Municipal Finance Management Act (MFMA) Circular No.102 and the PFMA Instruction Note No. 05 of 2020/21 which laid out procedures for the emergency procurement of Covid-19 related goods by municipalities and government departments, following the declaration of the State of Disaster, Treasury failed the country by not foreseeing the ensuing, inevitable corruption and putting precautionary measures in place. Treasury needs to ultimately ensure that the money meant for Covid-19 relief measures reaches its intended targets by implementing an accountability system where municipalities and government departments that have been implicated in Covid-19 corruption have to get final approval from Treasury before any procurements can be made. The guidelines Treasury released, allowed accounting officials to “deviate from inviting competitive bids” and to “procure the required goods or services by other means, such as price quotations or negotiations”. This exemption from following proper procurement procedures has clearly been exploited by some municipalities and provincial government departments for corruption during the Covid-19 emergency. It is beyond any doubt that Treasury’s pure intentions to temporarily suspend onerous normal supply chain management regulations to deal with the Covid-19 emergency have been hijacked by self-serving corrupt elements embedded in municipalities. This is why Finance Minister Tito Mboweni should implement immediate accountability measures for implicated municipalities and departments with immediate effect to stop pilferage of public resources that has reached crisis proportions in identified municipalities and provincial government departments: These are only a few examples, as much of the looting is still to be uncovered. However, those municipalities and department that have been exposed should not be allowed unencumbered access to money that will ultimately only line the pockets of corrupt officials. The DA has previously called on the Minister to create a Special Inspector-General in Treasury to prevent and probe corruption related to Covid-19 relief, recovery and stimulus funding. Despite having a list of goods and suppliers that Treasury had pre-negotiated with to keep prices down, certain provisions of the circular and notice give dishonest officials at municipalities and departments wide berth to exploit the emergency procurement waiver and engage in unscrupulous supply chain abuse. Click here to contribute to the DA’s legal action challenging irrational and dangerous elements of the hard lockdown in court