The Basic Education Minister, Angie Motshekga, is expected to address the nation tomorrow on the way forward in terms of the academic year. As the economy gradually reopens, schools will inevitably follow as parents return to work. South Africans are understandably anxious about their children returning to school, and they require peace of mind that the Department has a detailed plan in place to ensure that their children will be protected against the Covid-19 virus. The Democratic Alliance (DA) has taken note of calls by Unions that if one province is not fully prepared for opening, then none of the provinces should open. We cannot support this approach as it is critical that learners do not experience any further delays to their academic programmes. While questions around some of the provinces’ capacity to implement requirements in time and individual schools’ readiness to manage a strict, detailed set of protocols to protect learners and teachers against infection are legitimate, we cannot punish all learners because of the shortcomings of certain provincial education authorities. Minister Motshekga must, therefore, use her address to the nation on Wednesday to squash these wayward suggestions by unions and to make sound announcements on the academic year. Here are the DA’s expectations of the Minister: 1  Minister should announce a gradual and phased re-opening of schools guided by health concerns: 2  All children should be screened daily: 3  Mandatory social distancing, hygiene and personal protective equipment: 4  Online and remote teaching: Further suggestions can be viewed on the DA’s website. Minister Motshekga has indicated that the Department would spend the month of May preparing for the reopening of schools. This preparation will need to be extremely detailed and highly organised, across thousands of institutions and involving thousands of teachers and other staff. The DA will therefore keep a close eye throughout the process, and will not falter in our oversight role to ensure that our children are safe and healthy when they return to school.