The Democratic Alliance (DA) welcomes the phased, risk-based strategy for opening up the higher education sector announced by Minister Blade Nzimande during a press conference yesterday. The DA has previously made several proposals to the Ministry and we are pleased to see many of those proposals being incorporated. According to the phased, risk based strategy, most teaching will continue online while in stage 4, with a surge in online teaching from 1 June onwards. As soon as Stage 3 is announced, a third of all students will be able to return to face-to-face studies while online studies continue for the rest, while in each of Stages 2 and 1 a further one third will be added, again with online teaching continuing for any students unable to return. The DA further notes the emphasis on health protection measures which the Minister said are in the pipeline. Furthermore, the negotiated zero-rated websites and the provision of “educational data bundles” and resources for the purchase of laptops to students, together with the delivery of paper-based teaching and learning material will go a  long way in assisting learners who don’t have access to digital platforms. We acknowledge that each institution will differ in its implementation plans and capacity. Some might have to extend the academic year into 2021 in order to finish the work required and hold exams. In this case NSFAS might have to find an additional approximately R9bn order to cover the costs of students attending for another three months or so. The DA will keep a close eyes on how the Department supports and implements these plans across the country. A mammoth task lies ahead as students gradually return to the institutions and not every institution will  be able to fulfil the envisaged processes fully or perfectly. We will be monitoring the return of students over the next few months to ensure that where there are shortfalls they are quickly addressed.  We will also be looking carefully at the regulations that will follow this announcement by the Minister to ensure that they are sensible and rational. There are however more details to be confirmed that include: The DA is committed to ensuring South Africa adapts to the new normal, while recognising that the Constitution protects the right to education. Click here to contribute to the DA’s legal action challenging irrational and dangerous elements of the hard lockdown in court