Please find attached soundbite by Phumzile Van Damme MP. Following the latest in a string of allegations of Covid-related and other corruption implicating the Minister of Communications and Digital Technologies, Stella Ndabeni-Abrahams, she must step aside to allow investigations against her to be investigated without impediment. The latest allegation is that in July 2020, Ndabeni-Abrahams flouted procurement processes at the South Africa Post Office (SAPO) by introducing a businessman and chairperson of private equity firm, Convergence Partners, Andile Ngcaba, to SAPO’s executives in an alleged bid to partner on a highly lucrative R2.1 billion e-commerce platform. The Democratic Alliance (DA) has it on good authority that this is a practice Ndabeni-Abrahams regularly engages in – facilitating “meetings” to influence outcomes in the awarding of tenders. This is said to occur not only in her department but many others. We are aware that the SIU is currently conducting an investigation of corruption related to Covid-19 tenders. We will therefore be writing to the SIU to ascertain whether the allegations against Ndabeni-Abrahams are being investigated, if not, we will formally request that it does so. The string of allegations against Ndabeni-Abrahams almost all relate to alleged improper influence and abuse of power in favour of her husband, Thato Abrahams and go back nine years. We are aware that Ndabeni-Abrahams has made herself available to the ANC’s Integrity Commission but that is neither here or there. The allegations relates to infringement in her capacity as a Minister, an elected public representative not only as an ANC member. The ANC is well within its rights to investigate the Minister’s conduct, but one conducted by a public law enforcement agency is required. And it is practice that the individual implicated steps aside or is suspended. This is a precedent set by President Cyril Ramaphosa himself when his Spokesperson Khusela Diko took a leave of absence following a Covid-19 tender scandal. It is still our firm belief that Ndabeni-Abrahams is not fit for the office she holds and ought to be fired. We await the rumoured impending Cabinet reshuffle and trust that she will be shuffled straight out of the door.